Taxcalc-Payroll
==============


Taxcalc-Payroll is a microsimulation model for static analysis of
USA federal payroll taxes.

Taxcalc-Payroll is developed by Bodi Yang (github @[bodiyang](https://github.com/bodiyang)), 
from American Enterprise Institute. Contact: bodi.yang@aei.org

If you have questions about or would like to contribute to the project, please contact or 
submit an issue at the model's repository.


## Intro

You can install the Taxcalc-Payroll from GitHub. 

Taxcalc-Payroll interacts with other models in the
[AEI's Open Source Policy Center](https://www.ospc.org/) to conduct non-static
analysis.

When using [microdata](https://github.com/PSLmodels/taxdata#about-taxdata-repository)
that represent the USA population, Taxcalc-Payroll can estimate the aggregate
revenue and distributional effects of tax reforms under static analysis
assumptions. Taxcalc-Payroll can also process custom-created data on one or more filing
units permitting analysis of how tax reforms affect certain people.

The Python source code and embedded documentation are available at the
[Taxcalc-Payroll GitHub repository](https://github.com/bodiyang/Taxcalc-Payroll).


## Functions of Taxcalc-Payroll

The model's core tax calculation functions are (1) payroll tax calculation functions, and 
(2) employer-side payroll tax offset function 

## A Parallel Project with Tax-Calculator

Tax-Calculator and Taxcalc-Payroll are the microsimulation models for federal tax analysis.
They are parallel projects with different focus on inomce tax analysis and on payroll tax analysis. 
However, the two models are highly integrated. Users can perform both income tax and payroll tax 
analysis using either model.

Please read {doc}`about/history`, to learn more details of the relationship between two models.


## Usage

Taxcalc-Payroll can simulate an enormous number of tax reforms, because it parameterizes tax policy 
using over 200 parameters, that users can change **without doing any programming**. And even a reform 
that is not able to be characterized using currently-available parameters can be simulated by writing 
supplementary Python code that characterizes the reform.

For each filing unit, Taxcalc-Payroll can estimate the marginal tax rate generated by a small change 
in income. It can generate marginal tax rates for 18 different kinds of income and estimate marginal 
tax rates under any parametric tax reform.

Taxcalc-Payroll is extensively tested using hundreds of unit and integration
tests that achieve complete code coverage.
Also, there is an ongoing cross-model validation effort that uses large
randomly-generated samples of filing units to compare results generated by
Taxcalc-Payroll with results from other tax models.
The cross-model validation work with the National Bureau of Economic Research’s 
TAXSIM  is described [here](https://github.com/PSLmodels/Tax-Calculator/tree/master/taxcalc/validation).


## Latest release

{doc}`0.1.0 (2023-07-28) <about/releases>`

Please read the installation guide at {doc}`usage/starting`.

