Taxcalc-Payroll
==============

## Brief

Taxcalc-Payroll is a microsimulation model for static analysis of
USA federal payroll taxes.

You can install it from github.  

When using
[micro data](https://github.com/PSLmodels/taxdata#about-taxdata-repository)
that represent the USA population, Taxcalc-Payroll can estimate the aggregate
revenue and distributional effects of tax reforms under static analysis
assumptions.

Taxcalc-Payroll can also process custom-created data on one or more filing
units permitting analysis of how tax reforms affect certain people.

Taxcalc-Payroll interacts with other models in the
[AEI Open Source Policy Center](https://www.ospc.org/) to conduct non-static
analysis.

The Python source code and embedded documentation are available at the
[Taxcalc-Payroll GitHub repository](https://github.com/bodiyang/Taxcalc-Payroll).

Taxcalc-Payroll can simulate an enormous number of tax reforms because tax policy
is parameterized using over 200 parameters that can be changed by users
**without doing any programming**.
And even a reform that is not able to be characterized using
currently-available parameters can be simulated by writing supplementary Python
code that characterizes the reform.

Taxcalc-Payroll can estimate for each filing unit the marginal tax rate
generated by a small change in income.
Marginal tax rates can be generated for eighteen different kinds of income.
And marginal tax rates can be estimated under any parametric tax reform.

Taxcalc-Payroll is extensively tested using hundreds of unit and integration
tests that achieve complete code coverage.
Also, there is an ongoing cross-model validation effort that uses large
randomly-generated samples of filing units to compare results generated by
Taxcalc-Payroll with results from other tax models.
The cross-model validation work with NBER's TAXSIM model is described
[here](https://github.com/PSLmodels/Tax-Calculator/tree/master/taxcalc/validation).

## A parallel project with Tax-Calculator

Taxcalc-Payroll focuses on payroll tax analysis. It is a parallel project with Tax-Calculator 
which aims to be focusing more on income tax analysis. Taxcalc-Payroll inherits the infrastructure 
from Tax-Calculator. Two models are highly integrated. Users can do both income tax and payroll tax
 analysis in either of the model

Please read the details at {doc}`about/history`.

## Latest release

{doc}`0.1.0 (2023-07-28) <about/releases>`

Please read the installation guide at {doc}`usage/starting`.

## Disclaimer

Results will change as Taxcalc-Payroll data and logic improve.
A fundamental reason for adopting open-source methods in this project is so
that people from all backgrounds can contribute to the models that our society
uses to assess economic policy; when community-contributed improvements are
incorporated, the model will produce different results.

